.TH CRYPT\-ADMIN 1 "March 2026" "Punt Labs" "Crypt Game Engine"
.SH NAME
crypt\-admin \- scenario authoring tools for the Crypt text adventure
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B crypt\-admin generate
.B \-\-topology
.I type
.B \-\-source
.I path
.B \-\-title
.I title
.B \-\-output
.I dir
.RB [ \-\-db
.IR path ]
.br
.B crypt\-admin validate
.I path
.br
.B crypt\-admin export
.B \-\-db
.I path
.B \-\-output
.I dir
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B crypt\-admin
is the scenario authoring tool for Crypt.
It generates game scenarios graph\-first (DES\-027): a topology source
produces nodes and edges, BFS direction assignment creates valid
bidirectional 6\-direction connections, and visitors decorate rooms
with content.
.PP
Output is YAML directory format (manifest + region files) that
.BR cryptd (1)
loads directly.
An optional SQLite working format persists the graph for iterative
authoring.
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.SS generate
Generate a new scenario from a topology source.
.TP
.BI \-\-topology " type"
Topology source type. Currently supported:
.BR tree
(filesystem directory tree).
.TP
.BI \-\-source " path"
Source path for the topology (e.g.\& a directory to walk for
.B tree
topology).
.TP
.BI \-\-title " title"
Scenario title.
.TP
.BI \-\-output " dir"
Output directory for the generated YAML scenario.
Written atomically (temp dir + rename).
.TP
.BI \-\-db " path"
Optional: persist the graph to a SQLite database for iterative editing.
.SS validate
Validate a scenario file or directory.
.PP
.I path
may be a single YAML file or a directory containing
.IR scenario.yaml .
Prints
.B OK
on success; error message and exit code 1 on failure.
.SS export
Export a SQLite working database to YAML directory format.
.TP
.BI \-\-db " path"
Path to the SQLite database.
.TP
.BI \-\-output " dir"
Output directory for the exported YAML scenario.
.SH SCENARIO FORMATS
.SS Single\-file format
One
.I .yaml
file per scenario with rooms, items, enemies, and spells.
.SS Directory format
A directory containing:
.IP \(bu 3
.I scenario.yaml
\(em manifest with title, starting_room, death mode, region list,
and item/enemy/spell catalogs
.IP \(bu 3
.I regions/*.yaml
\(em room definitions grouped by region
.PP
Room IDs are globally unique across regions.
Cross\-region connections work naturally.
.B scenariodir.Load()
tries directory format first, falls back to single\-file.
.SH GRAPH CONSTRUCTION
The generator builds a connected graph with these invariants:
.IP \(bu 3
Bidirectionality: every edge has a reverse (north \(lA south)
.IP \(bu 3
Max degree 6: one edge per compass direction (N/S/E/W/Up/Down)
.IP \(bu 3
Connectivity: all nodes reachable from the start via BFS
.IP \(bu 3
Hub insertion: directories with >5 children get synthetic corridor nodes
.SH SQLITE SCHEMA
The working database enforces constraints at the schema level:
.IP \(bu 3
Foreign keys on edges reference existing nodes
.IP \(bu 3
CHECK constraints restrict directions to the 6 valid values
.IP \(bu 3
UNIQUE constraints prevent direction slot collisions
.IP \(bu 3
Meta table stores start node, title, and death mode
.SH EXAMPLES
Generate a scenario from a filesystem tree:
.PP
.RS
.nf
crypt\-admin generate \\
    \-\-topology tree \\
    \-\-source /usr/local \\
    \-\-title "UNIX Catacombs" \\
    \-\-output scenarios/unix\-catacombs/
.fi
.RE
.PP
Validate a directory\-format scenario:
.PP
.RS
.nf
crypt\-admin validate scenarios/unix\-catacombs/
.fi
.RE
.PP
Generate with SQLite working copy, then export:
.PP
.RS
.nf
crypt\-admin generate \\
    \-\-topology tree \-\-source ~/project \\
    \-\-title "My Dungeon" \\
    \-\-output scenarios/my\-dungeon/ \\
    \-\-db .tmp/my\-dungeon.db

# Edit the database, then re\-export:
crypt\-admin export \-\-db .tmp/my\-dungeon.db \\
    \-\-output scenarios/my\-dungeon/
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR cryptd (1),
.BR crypt (1),
.BR eval\-balance (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Punt Labs.
