.TH CRYPTD 1 "March 2026" "Punt Labs" "Crypt Game Engine"
.SH NAME
cryptd \- game engine server for the Crypt text adventure
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cryptd serve
.RB [ \-f ]
.RB [ \-t ]
.RB [ \-\-scenario
.IR id ]
.RB [ \-\-socket
.IR path ]
.RB [ \-\-listen
.IR addr ]
.RB [ \-\-passthrough ]
.RB [ \-\-script
.IR file ]
.RB [ \-\-name
.IR name ]
.RB [ \-\-class
.IR class ]
.RB [ \-\-json ]
.br
.B cryptd validate
.I scenario\-file
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B cryptd
is the game engine server for Crypt, a text adventure game playable via
CLI, Claude Code, or Lux.
It owns the deterministic game engine (movement, combat, inventory, spells,
leveling, save/load) and exposes it as a JSON\-RPC 2.0 service over Unix
socket or TCP.
.PP
The server runs in two modes:
.TP
.B Normal mode
Accepts free text from the player, routes it through an interpreter
and narrator, and returns display\-ready narrated text.
Three inference tiers: Claude API (with
.BR CRYPTD_API_KEY ),
local SLM via ollama, or deterministic rules + templates.
The server supports concurrent sessions with per\-session game isolation.
.TP
.B Passthrough mode
Exposes the raw MCP tool surface with structured JSON responses.
Used by the Crypt plugin for Claude Code.
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B serve
Start the game server. By default, daemonizes and listens on a Unix
socket at
.IR ~/.crypt/daemon.sock .
.TP
.B validate
Validate a scenario YAML file.
.B Deprecated:
use
.BR crypt\-admin (1)
validate instead.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Server options
.TP
.BI \-\-socket " path"
Unix socket path. Default:
.IR ~/.crypt/daemon.sock .
Mutually exclusive with
.BR \-\-listen .
.TP
.BI \-\-listen " addr"
TCP listen address (e.g.\&
.BR :9000 ).
Mutually exclusive with
.BR \-\-socket .
.TP
.B \-\-passthrough
Enable MCP passthrough mode (structured JSON, no interpreter/narrator).
.TP
.BI \-\-api\-key " key"
Anthropic API key for the Claude LLM inference tier. When set, the
server uses Claude for command interpretation and atmospheric narration.
Prefer the
.B CRYPTD_API_KEY
environment variable to avoid exposing the key in process listings.
.TP
.BI \-\-model " model"
Model name for the Claude LLM tier. Default:
.IR claude\-sonnet\-4\-20250514 .
.TP
.B \-f
Run in foreground (don't daemonize).
.SS Testing mode
.TP
.B \-t
Testing mode: run on stdin/stdout with no network. Implies
.BR \-f .
In interactive mode (no
.BR \-\-script ),
prompts for character creation (name, class, stat allocation) and
auto\-detects ollama for SLM narration.
.TP
.BI \-\-scenario " id"
Scenario ID to load. Required with
.BR \-t .
Resolved via
.I CRYPT_SCENARIO_DIR
(default:
.IR scenarios ).
.TP
.BI \-\-script " file"
Read commands from a text file (one per line,
.B #
comments). Uses deterministic rules + templates (no SLM).
.TP
.BI \-\-name " name"
Character name for scripted mode. Default:
.IR Adventurer .
.TP
.BI \-\-class " class"
Character class for scripted mode:
.BR fighter ,
.BR mage ,
.BR priest ,
.BR thief .
Default:
.IR fighter .
.TP
.B \-\-json
Output JSON transcript (requires
.BR \-\-script ).
.SH CHARACTER CREATION
In interactive
.B \-t
mode, the server prompts for:
.IP 1. 4
Character name (default: Adventurer)
.IP 2. 4
Class: fighter, mage, priest, thief
.IP 3. 4
Stat allocation: distribute 8 points across STR, DEX, CON, INT, WIS, CHA
(base 10 each). Enter 6 numbers (e.g.\&
.BR "4 0 2 0 2 0" )
or press Enter for defaults (STR 14, DEX 12, CON 12).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B CRYPTD_API_KEY
Anthropic API key for the Claude LLM inference tier. Equivalent to
.BR \-\-api\-key .
.TP
.B CRYPT_SCENARIO_DIR
Directory containing scenario files. Default:
.IR scenarios .
.SH MCP TOOLS
15 tools exposed via JSON\-RPC 2.0:
.BR new_game ,
.BR move ,
.BR look ,
.BR pick_up ,
.BR drop ,
.BR equip ,
.BR unequip ,
.BR examine ,
.BR inventory ,
.BR attack ,
.BR defend ,
.BR flee ,
.BR cast_spell ,
.BR save_game ,
.BR load_game .
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR crypt (1),
.BR crypt\-admin (1),
.BR eval\-balance (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Punt Labs.
