.TH CRYPT 1 "March 2026" "Punt Labs" "Crypt Game Engine"
.SH NAME
crypt \- thin client for the Crypt text adventure
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B crypt
.RB [ \-\-socket
.IR path ]
.RB [ \-\-addr
.IR host:port ]
.RB [ \-\-scenario
.IR id ]
.RB [ \-\-name
.IR name ]
.RB [ \-\-class
.IR class ]
.RB [ \-\-session
.IR id ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B crypt
is the player\-facing CLI client for Crypt.
It connects to a running
.BR cryptd (1)
server, sends natural language text via the
.B play
JSON\-RPC method, and renders the game with readline input, HP/MP
progress bars, and combat enemy lists.
.PP
If the server is not running on the local Unix socket,
.B crypt
auto\-starts
.B cryptd serve
in the background.
.PP
Crypt is playable in three environments:
.IP \(bu 3
Standalone CLI in a terminal shell
.IP \(bu 3
CLI within Claude Code (via the crypt plugin)
.IP \(bu 3
Lux display surface with Claude Code (ImGui\-based GUI)
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-socket " path"
Unix socket to connect to. Default:
.IR ~/.crypt/daemon.sock .
.TP
.BI \-\-addr " host:port"
TCP address to connect to (e.g.\&
.BR host:9000 ).
Overrides
.BR \-\-socket .
.TP
.BI \-\-scenario " id"
Scenario ID for auto\-started server. If the server is already running,
this flag is ignored.
.TP
.BI \-\-name " name"
Character name. Default:
.IR Adventurer .
.TP
.BI \-\-class " class"
Character class:
.BR fighter ,
.BR mage ,
.BR priest ,
.BR thief .
Default:
.IR fighter .
.TP
.BI \-\-session " id"
Resume a previous session by its ID. The session ID is printed to
stderr on each connection. When provided, the client sends the ID
in the
.B initialize
handshake and re\-enters the game loop without calling
.BR new_game .
.SH GAME COMMANDS
.TS
l l l.
\fBCommand\fR	\fBAliases\fR	\fBAction\fR
north, south, etc.	n, s, e, w, u, d	Move in direction
go <dir>	\-	Move in direction
look	l	Describe current room
examine <item>	x	Inspect an item
take <item>	get, grab	Pick up from room
drop <item>	\-	Drop to room
equip <item>	wear, wield	Equip from inventory
unequip <slot>	remove	Unequip to inventory
use <item>	drink, eat	Use consumable item
attack [target]	a, hit, strike, kill	Attack enemy (combat)
defend	block, guard	Defensive stance (combat)
flee	run, escape	Attempt to flee (combat)
cast <spell>	\-	Cast a spell
inventory	i	List inventory
save [slot]	\-	Save game
load [slot]	\-	Load game
help	?	List commands
quit	exit, q	End the game
.TE
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B CRYPT_SCENARIO_DIR
Scenario directory for auto\-started servers. Default:
.IR scenarios .
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR cryptd (1),
.BR crypt\-admin (1),
.BR eval\-balance (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Punt Labs.
