.TH EVAL\-BALANCE 1 "March 2026" "Punt Labs" "Crypt Game Engine"
.SH NAME
eval\-balance \- monkey test harness for Crypt game balance tuning
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B eval\-balance
.RB [ \-\-scenario
.IR id ]
.RB [ \-\-players
.IR n ]
.RB [ \-\-max\-moves
.IR n ]
.RB [ \-\-class
.IR class ]
.RB [ \-\-workers
.IR n ]
.RB [ \-\-seed
.IR n ]
.RB [ \-\-verbose ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B eval\-balance
runs parallel game sessions with weighted\-random action selection
and produces a JSON aggregate report for game balance tuning.
.PP
Each session creates a character, plays through a scenario making
state\-aware random decisions, and collects metrics.
The monkey player is smarter than pure random: it auto\-equips weapons
and armor, uses health potions when low on HP, prioritizes item pickup,
and adjusts combat strategy based on health (flee\-heavy when HP is
low, attack\-heavy when healthy).
.PP
Sessions run in\-process using the game engine directly (no network,
no SLM), achieving thousands of sessions per second.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-scenario " id"
Scenario ID to test. Default:
.IR minimal .
Resolved via
.IR CRYPT_SCENARIO_DIR .
.TP
.BI \-\-players " n"
Number of sessions to run. Default:
.IR 1000 .
.TP
.BI \-\-max\-moves " n"
Maximum moves per session before forced quit. Default:
.IR 200 .
.TP
.BI \-\-class " class"
Character class:
.BR fighter ,
.BR mage ,
.BR priest ,
.BR thief ,
or
.BR all
(distribute evenly across classes).
Default:
.IR fighter .
.TP
.BI \-\-workers " n"
Parallel worker goroutines. Default:
.IR 8 .
Use
.B 1
for fully deterministic sessions (the engine uses the global RNG
for combat dice).
.TP
.BI \-\-seed " n"
Master RNG seed for deterministic session generation. Default:
.IR 42 .
Per\-session seeds are derived deterministically from this value.
.TP
.B \-\-verbose
Include per\-session detail in the JSON output.
Without this flag, only aggregate metrics are reported.
.SH MONKEY STRATEGY
.SS Combat (HP > 30%)
Attack 70%, defend 15%, flee 10%, cast heal 5% (casters only).
.SS Combat (HP \(<= 30%)
Flee 40%, defend 20%, attack 20%, cast heal 20% (casters only).
.SS Out of combat
Auto\-equip weapons and armor immediately.
Use health potions at \(<= 50% HP.
Take items from room (60%), move randomly (30%), look (10%).
Empty room: move (80%), look (10%), inventory (10%).
.SS Class\-optimal stats
Each class uses a tailored 8\-point stat allocation:
.TS
l c c c c c c.
\fBClass\fR	STR	DEX	CON	INT	WIS	CHA
Fighter	14	10	14	10	10	10
Mage	10	12	10	14	12	10
Priest	10	12	12	10	14	10
Thief	12	14	12	10	10	10
.TE
.SH METRICS
.SS Per\-session
Total moves, rooms visited, enemies killed, XP gained, final level,
levels gained, items picked up, items equipped, combat rounds,
damage dealt, damage taken, survival (boolean), flee attempts,
flee successes, spells cast, heals cast, potions used.
.SS Aggregate
Survival rate, mean/p50/p95 for moves/XP/kills, mean level,
mean damage dealt/taken, mean combat rounds, flee success rate,
level\-up rate, mean potions used.
Per\-class breakdown when
.B \-\-class=all
is used.
.SH OUTPUT
JSON report to stdout.
Summary line to stderr.
.PP
Example:
.PP
.RS
.nf
eval\-balance \-\-scenario unix\-catacombs \\
    \-\-players 500 \-\-class all \-\-workers 1
.fi
.RE
.SH BALANCE TARGETS
Target ranges for a well\-balanced scenario:
.TS
l l.
\fBMetric\fR	\fBTarget\fR
Survival rate (all classes)	50\(en75%
Class survival spread	< 20 percentage points
Level\-up rate	> 50%
Mean enemies killed	\(>= 3
Flee success rate	55\(en70%
.TE
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B CRYPT_SCENARIO_DIR
Scenario directory. Default:
.IR scenarios .
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR cryptd (1),
.BR crypt (1),
.BR crypt\-admin (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Punt Labs.
